[music]
[music] Bushkin.
Um, so I'm calling you because I'm doing
a little thing on how I don't like my
birthday.
>> Yes.
>> And I my I have questions for you.
>> Yes. I I I am eagerly waiting to hear
this because I have spent a lot of time
wondering what it's all about.
>> That's my mom, Joyce. She's very short,
speaks very softly. You would like her.
>> Do you remember ever having a birthday
party for me when I was a child?
>> I think we did. We We didn't do exotic
things. I think you had people sleep
over or you had some people to to tea a
few friends from school.
>> I remember there was once a big party
and
>> really
>> and I and and I I said and I afterwards
I said that's enough.
>> Okay. Now, well, are you going to ex
explain what you were [laughter] what
was enough? [music]
>> In case you're wondering, my mom is a
therapist.
>> I just thought it was a I thought it was
a needless production to have all these
people over.
>> What should it have been instead?
>> Well, the what what what I do now is
perfect, which is nothing.
>> Oh, I see. I So you didn't enjoy any
part of having friends to eat with you?
>> No,
[music]
>> I haven't had a birthday party since.
It's worse than that. I don't remember
anyone's birthday. I know my mother's,
but not my father's. One of my brothers,
but not the other. One of my daughters
was born in July and the other in
August, but I'm not sure which is which.
If I were to name my five closest
friends, I think I know the birthday of
one of them. And that's because it's
January 1st and I just saw him on
January 1st. And he said to me with
tones of great injury and reproach,
"Today is my birthday." But I am sure
I'll forget that fact really soon. On
this particular subject, the overloaded
lifeboat that is my memory is refusing
all further passengers. And by the way,
my mother reminded me it's not just
birthdays that I have a problem with.
It's any kind of arbitrary celebration.
>> So you you were um a a very thoughtful
child. The fact, for example, that you
challenged your teacher, Miss Brown.
>> Mrs. Brown was my first grade teacher. I
was very fond of Mrs. Brown. But one day
at school, she brought up Christmas and
Santa Claus.
>> And you put your hand up and said,
"There is no Santa Claus." [laughter]
This was
>> and she had a real problem because here
she was speaking to a group of small
children who wanted to believe.
>> Yes. This they're linked. By the way, I
my disdain for Santa Claus and my
disdain for my birthday. Is this part of
the same impulse?
>> Yes, of course.
>> Yes, of course, says mom the therapist.
>> [music]
>> Why am I telling you all this? Because
last year, 2025, [music]
was the 10th anniversary of when we
started making revisionist history, and
I forgot all about it. Totally skipped
my mind [music] until I was randomly on
the revisionist.com website looking up
some forgotten fact from an episode from
season 1, one of my favorites, [music]
Food Fight, and I noticed the release
date,
July 14th, 2016. [music]
And I realized, holy mackerel, we've
been around for 10 years.
The internet tells me that this is the
tin or aluminum anniversary, which I
have to say kind of proves my point.
What are you supposed to do on your 10th
[music] anniversary? Write I love you in
magic marker on a sheet of tin foil.
This was back in the summer. So, what
did I do? [music] I didn't say anything.
Kept it to myself. It's better this way,
I thought. But then I remembered a date
I went on many years ago with a girl who
told me that she turned her birthday
every year into a 7-day marathon. She
called it, wait for it, princess [music]
week. Picture me in the dark and bar
making sense of that revelation. Good
lord.
But if someone wants princess week,
shouldn't we just [music] give them
princess week? So all of you
insufferably sentimental people out
there in listener land, this is for you.
A little revisionist history 10th
anniversary [music]
celebration.
To get started, I did a little homework.
Sent out a tweet, asked listeners for
feedback, scoured some Reddit threads,
talked with people who've been involved
in the show over the years trying to
generate a highlight reel for the big
birthday party. What was her favorite
moment memory? First thing I got back
was from my colleague Ben Nadaf Hafrey,
who talked to my old producer Eloise
Linton about a reporting trip we took
back in 2021 for the episode The Dog
Will See You Now.
>> Um, okay. So Malcolm wanted to do an
episode on these dogs who were trained
to smell CO and we found this center in
Alabama that that trained these
specialized dogs and um we all decided
to go on a road trip
>> and it was me, Malcolm and Jacob Smith.
So, Malcolm and two producers. And part
of the thing that was fun, but also kind
of crazy about it was that we were just
sort of coming out of CO. So, we hadn't
It was fun to take a trip in a moment
when when there wasn't a lot of
socializing or traveling going on.
>> Let me just butt in here and say that no
one loves doing Alabama stories more
than me. Back in season 2, we did the
foot soldier of Birmingham. Season
[music] 8, we did an episode called
Footnote. Remember for our guns series
about a guy living on an old plantation
outside of Tuskegee? Season 10, we went
to Scottsboro, Alabama for an episode of
our 1936 Olympic series. And we just did
the Alabama Murders, a seven-part series
about crime and punishment and
redemption [music]
set in a little town in northwestern
Alabama. Ben and I went twice. Ben
[music] went a third time on his own. No
one loves Alabama more than I love
Alabama.
So, in the middle of CO, I want to do a
story about how dogs are much better at
detecting CO than even the most
sophisticated molecular bioassay. And I
find out that one of the biggest COVID
K9 [music] training centers is an hour's
drive from Birmingham, way up in the
hills. Alabama, cute puppies, viral
epidemics.
My feeling was that this might be the
perfect [music] revisionist history
story.
One fun thing that I learned about
Malcolm on this trip is that he doesn't
believe in using maps. Um, which caused
>> you know doesn't believe in map.
>> He doesn't want he doesn't you can ask
him his philosophy on it. There's I'm
sure he has some great answer but I he
would not use a map. So, it was kind of
me and Jacob secretly checking our, you
know, Google Maps and sort of suggesting
that he take certain turns,
>> licking your fingers, sticking it to the
wind, and being like, "Yeah, that way."
[laughter]
>> Yeah,
>> this is true. Since we're talking about
my parents, one of my fondest memories
of being a kid is driving with my family
somewhere and clearly getting hopelessly
lost and my father announcing gleefully
from the front seat, "I'm following my
nose." I felt that my young producers
deserved a similar experience.
[music]
>> And on this long drive road trip, we had
to stop for gas. And we stopped at a
very desolate gas station kind of in the
middle of nowhere. Very in the middle of
nowhere. And
Malcolm and Jacob both went in to grab
something [music] and I went to the
bathroom and I came back out and they
were gone. and I left my cell phone in
the car and
I just kind of remember calculating what
my options were in terms of what I could
do. So, I remember I went into the I
went into the sort of gas [music]
station and
was contemplating calling my family,
calling my roommate and saying, "Listen,
my boss left me at a [music] gas
station."
>> In fairness to me and Jacob, Eloise had
been sitting in [music] the back seat,
and she is by nature quiet as a church
mess. So, it makes sense that we might
assume that she was back there all the
time reading a book or something. And it
did not take that long for us to realize
our mistake. Maybe 10 miles max. And in
the frantic drive back, both Jacob and I
felt really, really guilty.
Anyway, why am I telling you this story?
Because when I meet listeners, I think
they have the impression that this show
is some big, welloiled corporate
machine. And clearly, it's not.
>> I was like, did you try calling me?
Like, what what went through? I don't
think we really talked about it cuz we
were also late.
>> All right, speaking of Ben, here's a
note from my Twitter call out from a
listener named Rob Gilfillian. Here's my
question. Malcolm pronounces his
colleagueu's name as Ben Nadafhrey,
while Ben calls himself Benadev Haffrey.
It's similar to the difference in
pronouncing Pan or Pan or Caribbean or
Caribbean. These two obviously spend a
lot of time together. Seems odd.
This is so true. It's because I just
love a double-barreled last name. I wish
I had one. My mother's maiden name was
Nation. Can you imagine if I were known
as Malcolm Nation Gladwell? I would be
unstoppable. So, I'm deeply appreciative
of that Nadaf in the middle of Ben's
name. I want to give it the kind of
relish I believe it deserves. Nadaf is
like pickles on a sandwich. It's
transformative.
The other reason while I'm on this
subject is that this is the price I pay
for being the child of a Jamaican and an
Englishman who was raised in Canada and
then moved to the United States. I have
four different pronunciation and accent
models bouncing around my head at all
times. Everything is up for grabs. The
person who knows this better than anyone
is my producer, Nina Lawrence.
>> Yeah, you have a real problem with uh
with ambulances.
[laughter]
And what do you say?
>> Um, but when the ambulance arrived a few
minutes later
>> and what do I say
>> when the ambulance?
That's the That's what it says.
Ambulance.
What?
Where were we? One more memory. [music]
We're celebrating our 10th anniversary.
>> Oh my god.
>> And you were you were the principal
figure in the founding of revisionist
history, right?
>> That's crazy.
I guess I mean yeah I was there I was
there from the very very start. I
remember our very first meeting.
>> Mia label [music] the person who taught
me everything there is to know about
podcasting.
I want you to go back. So we we were
interviewing people and you waltzed in.
[laughter]
>> Is that how is that how it felt that I w
that I waltzed in?
>> I had no idea who you were. I did I did
not I did not read your resume in
advance. I never do
>> that tracks.
>> I think it's [laughter] pointless. Um
the wait but I want to know what were
you we had never met before.
>> We had never met before.
>> What were your impressions there? I was
skinny Malcolm. What what did you think?
>> Well, I knew your work coming in and I
had read the outline of your
>> I'd given you an out an outline of some
suggested ideas I had for for the first
season.
>> Yes. Yes. And there was some great, you
know, there was some great stuff in
there, but I also saw a lot of sports
and cars and all the sources that you
referenced were dudes and I was just
like, "Okay, here we go."
>> And [clears throat] so [laughter]
I'm not a mean person, but I I needed to
speak my truth.
>> No one is [laughter]
>> my truth, which was there's some great
stuff here, but no woman is ever going
to listen to this podcast, [laughter]
>> which I love. So I remember I remember
that perfectly. I just I the minute I
heard that I fell in love with you. I
was like I I was like so [laughter] so I
so want to work with this woman. This is
fantastic.
It was a show called Revisionist
History. The tagline was because
sometimes the past deserves a second
chance. The premise of the show was that
you needed to go back over things that
had happened because chances are you got
them wrong the first time. And Mia walks
in, looks at the proposed lineup of
episodes, and says, "You need to go back
over them. You got them wrong the first
time. Under the circumstances, who could
say no?"
After talking to Mia, I thought of one
of my all-time favorite songs, David
Allen Co, You Never Even Called Me by My
Name, which begins with the perfect
country opening line. But it was all
that I could do
to keep from crying.
>> If you've never heard of David Alen Co.
by the way, let me just read you a line
taken at random from his Wikipedia page.
After concluding another prison term in
1967, Co embarked on a music career in
Nashville, living in a hearse, which he
parked in front of the Ryman auditorium
while he performed on the street. How
can you not love David Allen Co? Anyway,
halfway through You Never Even called Me
by My Name, Co just stops and says,
>> "Well, a friend of mine [music] named
Steve Goodman wrote that song and he
told me it was the perfect country and
western song."
I wrote him back [music] a letter and I
told him it was not the perfect country
and western song because he hadn't said
anything at all about mama or trains
or [music] trucks
or prison
or getting drunk. So then Goodman writes
a new verse, sends it to Co, and Co
says, "Okay, now this really is the
perfect country and western song."
>> The last verse [music] goes like this
here.
Well, I was drunk
the day [music] my mom got out of
prison.
And I went to pick [music] her up
in the rain.
[music]
But before I could get [music] to the
station in the pickup
truck,
she got [music] run over by a damn old
train.
>> I think you can see where I'm going with
this. A singer insists on going back
over a song, [music] a song that has
already been written because he thinks
the songwriter got it wrong the first
time. And what's the fix? Nothing
elaborate. The most prosaic of things.
The bare essentials for a country
singer. Mama, trains, trucks, prisons,
and getting drunk. That's what I think
we've learned over the first 10 years of
this show. That getting something right
doesn't require heroics. It's just
following your nose and turning around
when you mistakenly left someone behind.
[music] After the break, the celebration
continues.
>> [music]
>> Okay, I have some thoughts about the
first 10 years of revisionist history.
Why it has been so much fun because it's
been way way more fun than I ever
imagined. For me, it starts with the
difference between reading a story and
hearing a story. In reading, the writer
is in charge of what appears on the
page. If you read one of my books and
you liked it, you're giving me a direct
compliment. You're saying, "I like what
you made." But when you listen to a
story made up of interviews with all
sorts of people and archival tape
stitched together with bits of narrative
here and there, you aren't saying, "I
like what you made." You're saying, "I
like what you found." And that's a very
different thing.
One episode listeners ranked as a
favorite on my Twitter poll, for
example, is My Little Hundred Million
from season 1. An episode all about the
strange phenomenon of wealthy people
giving millions of dollars to colleges
that already have millions of dollars as
opposed to schools that don't have
millions of dollars. There's a moment in
the episode where I call up John
Hennessy, who was the president of
Stanford University at the time.
Stanford is a tiny fraction of the size
of its neighbors in the University of
California system. And yet in 2016,
Stanford's endowment was 22 billion. The
UC systems endowment much much smaller
by about $8.5 billion. [music]
So I asked Hennessy,
>> "Do you ever imagine that a a president
of Stanford might go to a funer and say
at this point in our history the best
use of your money is to give to the UC
system, not to Stanford?"
>> Well, that's a uh that would be a hard
thing to do obviously to to um [music]
turn them turn them away. And I think
the other question we'd be asked is how
can I have confidence that they'll use
my money? Well, um, which we're
obviously the president of Stanford is
not in a position to vouch [music] for.
I think
>> it's an amazing answer. And what's
amazing is that he had every reason to
duck that question or brush it aside or
tell a lie. But he doesn't. He decides
to be completely honest. He owns up to
the fact that even though he is an
educator, he is not primarily in the
education business. He's in the Stanford
business. And I suspect that one of the
reasons so many people listed My Little
Hundred Million as one of their
favorites is because of that little bit
of tape from Hennessy. I didn't make
that moment. I didn't anticipate it. I
didn't manipulate Hennessy into saying
it. I stumbled into it. And the
wonderful thing about audio is that it
allows you to capture those found
moments exactly as they're happening.
There's an even better example of this.
It's from another episode on the list
from listeners Elvis Analysis Paraprais
season 3. If you haven't heard it, the
premise is pretty simple. One of Elvis's
trademark songs was Are You Lonesome
Tonight? And in the middle of the song,
there's a bridge, a couple of spoken
sentences, a little saliloquy. And over
and over again, whenever Elvis had to
say the bridge, he'd screw it up, get
the words wrong, break out into totally
inappropriate laughter.
The world's a stage and each must play a
part. [music]
[laughter]
[music]
The Freudian term for what Elvis was
doing is called paraprais. A slip of the
tongue that reveals something about the
speaker. So, the episode was trying to
answer what does Elvis's issue with the
bridge tell us about Elvis. Now, I
should say I had all kinds of trouble
doing this story. There was a great
essay written about Elvis's paraprais by
the psychologist Alan Elms. So, I flew
to Sacramento to meet with Elms, but he
wasn't well and couldn't really speak.
So, I kind of gave up, put the story
aside for months until I had the random
idea of just going to Nashville and
having professional musicians sing Are
You Lonesome Tonight and explained to me
why the bridge is so complicated. I went
to see Bobby Bradock, one of the
legendary Nashville songwriters, and he
brought with him a good friend, a singer
named Casey BS. Casey sang Are You
Lonesome Tonight? And then we got on the
subject of another song, one of her own.
Do you find yourself making the kind of
errors sometimes even subtle ones that
you know
>> we've been talking about?
>> That's so interest. I I wrote a song
about my mother called somebody
something and my mother is adorable and
whenever you heard about things going
wrong or like some tumultuous story it
was my dad and so I finally was like you
know what mom you're the only person in
the family that there's nothing I
haven't written about. So I was trying
to dig dirt on her and there was
nothing.
>> [laughter]
>> And so I end up writing this song about
her called somebody something. And I cry
every time I do it. And there is a line.
It says, you know, she's always been
somebody something. She's lived every
life but her own. Um
and it's gone. I cannot remember it
right now.
>> I don't know that feeling.
>> I can't remember it.
>> She's always been somebody something.
It's been everything but alone. A
daughter, a mother, a life, a daughter,
a lover, a wife, and a mother. She's
lived every life but her own. Yeah.
She's always been somebody something.
And there's a line that says, you know,
she she wonders what it might be like to
be somebody else. And she wonders
what it feels like to be free,
but she's always imagined being nobody's
nothing. And that's something she'd
never want to be. But that line usually
is just
>> gone. And um a lot of times I'll go hold
on and divert and tell a funny story
really quickly.
>> Um
>> yeah,
>> what's the the specific line that's gone
is which one?
>> Uh well, it's gone again. Um she's
always been somebody. She's been
everything but alone. Daughter, a lover,
a daughter, a lover, a wife, and a
mother. She's been everything
but alone. Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Why is it that long?
>> I don't know. I think that um
>> I don't know. I think when you you would
she's so uh when you see somebody give
so much of themselves and that's truly
the only thing that she will never
experience and I think it's what I've
experienced the most of.
>> I go to Nashville to write a story about
paraprais and what happens? I find
paraprais. It occurs before my eyes and
I was lucky enough to have the tape
recorder running. And the reason I love
that episode and why so many listeners
over the years have said it's their
favorite is that you, the listener, and
me, the host, get to participate in this
little golden moment of serendipity
together. Wait, Casey, can you play that
song for us? Is it going to be too?
>> Let's see.
Okay. [clears throat]
Okay. Well, we'll see if this happens.
>> [music]
[music]
>> What did I just say? Sorry, I'm thinking
about mom. [clears throat]
She grew up playing cowgirl. She grew up
playing cowgirl [music]
in a railroad [singing]
town,
[music] dreaming she'd see Hollywood
someday.
She knew some [music and singing]
distant Friday night
with a cigarette to hold just right.
fate would [music and singing] come and
carry her away.
[music]
As as far as she could see from there,
those were just
not right.
Hold one second.
>> There it is again. Parapractis
>> in [singing] December. [music]
Maybe
in a dress her mama [singing] made.
She looked [music] all grown up standing
there like that.
>> I've been making things my whole life.
What I've learned over the last 10 years
of doing this is that I much prefer
finding things.
[singing and music]
>> Not that part. That part
from there. [music and singing]
>> We'll be right back. You went from
[music and singing]
>> So I wanted to go over our greatest
found moment and I want to see whether
you you believe this is our greatest
found moment.
>> Okay. I called up Ben Nadaf Haffrey
again to talk about the time we went to
Los Angeles for our 1936 Olympic series
and we go and see the legendary Milan
Tiff who I've been obsessed with since I
was a kid.
>> I whom I never heard of true to form.
>> No one almost no one has ever heard of
Milan Tiff because he was briefly the
greatest triple jumper in the world in
some point in the 1970s. So you
understand there's a small universe.
There's a small universe of people who
remember track and field in the 70s and
an even smaller universe of people who
followed the triple jump.
>> And above that at the top of the funnel
is people who know Yeah. Right. who know
what triple jump is like heard of it.
>> But Milan was this kind of spectral
brilliant. He was an artist. He spoke in
these kind of these kind of nomic
utterances.
>> It was one of the trippiest mornings of
my life.
>> He was he was just a he was drugs.
He's so fascinating and kind of just
like I immediately knew we were in some
magical universe when we went to see um
Milan Tiff. Milan takes us to the UCLA
track and he wants to show us the
secrets to the triple jump and my
interest in all of this I'm actually
because I'm a huge track and field fan.
I am I'm just so happy to be at the UCLA
track and I'm aware of the fact that you
don't you're not a track and field fan
and I I'm desperate to kind of impress
upon you why this is the greatest sport
of all time and I want you to appreciate
the beauty of running which to my mind
is the reason you watch track and field.
And so I see out of the corner of my eye
a woman running 200 meter intervals on
the track and I say to you Ben, you
>> and I could see it. I could see it. You
could see it. You could see it. And I
said to you, I actually went back over
the tape. I said to you, I don't know
who that is, but that's a great runner.
And then she got closer and stopped and
was chatting with Milan. And we go over
there and we realize it's Sydney
McGlaughlin.
>> You're using you're using we liberally
here.
>> It's the greatest, for those who don't
know who Sydney McLolin is, maybe the
greatest female runner of the last
hundred years. I mean, she's the world
record holder a zillion times, double
gold medal winner in the Olympics,
clearly the greatest American runner of
her generation. And it was a foul
moment. Here I was trying here. I was I
went with you to the UCLA track to try
and prove to you that there was
something beautiful and transcendent
about running. And I point out my my my
example. And my example turns out to be
the greatest runner of her generation.
It was like it's in it was insane
serendipity.
>> It is incredible. Yeah.
>> One more thought about made things
versus found things. Not long ago, I
tweeted out the following. A question
that has haunted me ever since I've been
forced to read Cinderella a zillion
times. Why does the coach turn into a
pumpkin, the coachman into mice, and the
dress to rags? But the magical glass
slippers are fine. Did the fairy
godmother have a carveout for shoes?
A ton of people weighed in with their
answers because I don't know, it seems
like a question that really needs an
answer. And my favorite was this from
Medctual, who I think is a neurologist
in Switzerland, although who knows. Oh,
Malcolm, because magic in fairy tales
follows symbolism, not physics. The
coach, dress, and servants are borrowed
transformation. The slippers are proof
of identity, not escapism. If they
vanished, the story loses its logic and
its justice,
which is beautiful, right? And I didn't
come up with that. I put the question to
all of you out there, to the listeners
of revisionist history, people who are
as interested as we are in solving
life's enduring and consequential and
sometimes not so consequential
mysteries. And one of you who I've never
met gave me a little gift which I can
[music] in turn share with all of you.
Forgive me. I'm going to violate all my
principles here and get sentimental. But
the great revelation of the last 10
years has been how much all of us here
at Revisionist History have enjoyed
[music] telling stories for all of you.
Stories about the unexpected captured in
real time with real voices and real
emotion and a real sense of awe about
the endless surprises the world has in
store for us. I ran into you as I'm
walking down the street or going through
an airport and from emails in my inbox
and let me just say it's been one of the
great joys of my life to meet all of
you.
Happy 10 anniversary, revisionist
history.
[music]
Well, it was all [singing and music]
that I could do to keep on crying.
>> Vicious history is produced by Lucy
Sullivan, Bened Haffrey, and Nina Bird
Lawrence. Our editor is Karen Shakuri.
Factchecking by Anukica Robbins. Our
executive producer is Jacob Smith.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence.
Original music by Luis Gara. Sound
design and mastering by Jake Gorski.
Special thanks to my mom. And to Jim
Sullivan, my producer Lucy's father
[music] for recording his very own
rendition of You Never Even Call Me by
My Name, which Lucy tells me her dad
sang to her all the time when she was
growing up. [music]
I'm Malcolm Glaba
>> and I [singing] never minded [music]
standing in the rain.
[music and singing] But you don't have
to call me darling. Darling,
[music] but you [singing] never even
call me.
Um, mommy, this is exactly
this is exactly what I needed.
>> Oh, very good. Good. Very lovely to hear
you. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Mommy. I'll talk to you soon.
>> We'll talk to you again. Thank you. Bye
bye. Bye bye.